docs/examples.md, before:

# SWI-Prolog MCP Server - Example Queries

A collection of practical examples for using the SWI-Prolog MCP Server.

## Setup

1. Build server and start inspector:
```bash
npm run build
npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector --transport stdio node build/index.js
```

2. Browser opens automatically with the Inspector interface

## Basic Examples

### 1. Load Test File

**Tool:** `db_load`
```json
{
  "filename": "test.pl"
}
```

**Expected Response:** Confirmation that the file was loaded

### 2. List Available Predicates

**Tool:** `symbols_list`
```json
{}
```

**Expected Response:** List of all available predicates with arity (e.g. `parent/2`, `male/1`)

## Family Data Examples

### 3. Find All Parents of Mary

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "parent(X, mary)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected Response:** First parent (e.g., "X = john")

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected Response:** Next parent or "no more solutions"

**Tool:** `query_close`
```json
{}
```

### 4. Step-by-Step List Member Query

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "member(X, [apple, banana, cherry])"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = apple"

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = banana"

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = cherry"

**Tool:** `query_close`
```json
{}
```

## Advanced Examples

### 5. Add New Family Relations

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "parent(alice, bob)"
}
```

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "parent(bob, charlie)"
}
```

### 6. Query with Rules

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "grandparent(X, Z) :- parent(X, Y), parent(Y, Z)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "grandparent(alice, charlie)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected:** "true" (alice is grandmother of charlie)

### 7. Number Range Queries

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "between(1, 5, X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (repeat multiple times)
```json
{}
```
**Responses:** "X = 1", "X = 2", "X = 3", "X = 4", "X = 5", then "no more solutions"

### 8. Mathematical Calculations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "X is 2 + 3 * 4"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = 14"

### 9. List Operations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "append([1,2], [3,4], X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = [1,2,3,4]"

### 10. Backtracking with Multiple Solutions

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "member(X, [red, green, blue]), member(Y, [car, bike])"
}
```

This finds all combinations of colors and vehicles:

**Tool:** `query_next` (multiple times)
- "X = red, Y = car"
- "X = red, Y = bike"  
- "X = green, Y = car"
- "X = green, Y = bike"
- "X = blue, Y = car"
- "X = blue, Y = bike"

### 11. Working with Strings

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(john, pizza)"
}
```

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(mary, pasta)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "likes(Person, Food)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (repeat)
- "Person = john, Food = pizza"
- "Person = mary, Food = pasta"

### 12. Remove Facts

**Tool:** `db_retract`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(john, pizza)"
}
```

### 13. Complex Arithmetic

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "X is sqrt(16), Y is X + 10"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = 4, Y = 14"

### 14. Type Checking

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "number(42)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "true"

### 15. Variable Instantiation Check

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "var(X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "true" (X is uninstantiated)

## Error Handling Examples

### 16. Invalid Syntax

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "this is not valid prolog"
}
```
**Expected:** Error message about syntax

### 17. Non-existent Predicate

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "nonexistent_predicate(X)"
}
```
**Expected:** "no_solutions" or error message

### 18. File Not Found

**Tool:** `db_load`
```json
{
  "filename": "nonexistent_file.pl"
}
```
**Expected:** Error message about file not found

## Performance Examples

### 19. Large List Operations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "length(List, 1000), member(500, List)"
}
```

This tests performance with large data structures.

### 20. Infinite Solutions (Controlled)

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "between(1, inf, X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (a few times, then close)
**Tool:** `query_close` (to prevent infinite computation)

## Integration Workflow

### 21. Complete Knowledge Base Session

1. Load data: `db_load` → `{"filename": "family.pl"}`
2. Explore structure: `symbols_list` → `{}`
3. Query base facts: `query_start` → `{"query": "parent(X, Y)"}`
4. Get solutions step by step with `query_next`
5. Add new family: `db_assert` → `{"fact": "parent(alice, bob)"}`
6. Complex query: `query_start` → `{"query": "grandparent(X, Y)"}`
7. Cleanup: `db_retract` → `{"fact": "parent(alice, bob)"}`

## Best Practices

### Query Session Management
- Always `query_close` queries when done to free resources
- Use step-by-step retrieval for potentially large result sets
- Check "more_solutions" flag to know when to stop

### Error Prevention
- Validate file paths before `db_load`
- Test simple queries before complex ones
- **Backup creation**: Use `query_start` to document facts before `db_retract`

### Performance Tips
- Close infinite or very large solution queries early
- Use specific queries instead of overly general ones
- Consider using `query_close` if you only need the first few solutions

## Debugging Workflow

1. List predicates: `symbols_list`
2. Test basic facts: `query` → simple fact checking
3. Build complexity gradually
4. Use step-by-step `next` to understand solution flow
5. Add debugging facts with `db_assert` for tracing

## Known Variations

Depending on SWI‑Prolog and environment settings, response formatting may vary slightly:

- Atoms/strings: some outputs include quotes (e.g., `S="hello_world"`) while others show atoms without quotes (`S=hello_world`).
- Lists and bindings: values may appear inside brackets depending on the term structure (e.g., `Solution: [S=world]`).
- Whitespace: spacing around `=` can vary.

Tips:
- Prefer pattern‑based matching in clients/tests (e.g., `/S\s*=\s*hello_world/`) rather than strict string equality.
- For structured parsing, use the server’s `solution([...])` format as the source of truth and then format for display.

## Safe Built-ins (Whitelist) & Examples

The server enables a safe subset of pure built-ins and list utilities in the `kb` module so you can write useful queries without side effects. Below are practical examples that work out of the box.

### Arithmetic and Filtering

Find all even numbers between 1 and 10:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "findall(X, (between(1,10,X), 0 is X mod 2), L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [2,4,6,8,10]"

### Collections with findall/3

Collect elements from a list:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "findall(X, member(X, [a,b,c]), L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [a,b,c]"

### Guarded maplist/2-3 (kb only)

Define a pure helper, then map it over a list. The server exposes `kb:maplist` which only accepts `kb:` goals to keep execution safe.

1) Define a helper in `kb`:

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "double(X, Y) :- Y is X * 2"
}
```

2) Map over a list:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "kb:maplist(double, [1,2,3], L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [2,4,6]"

### String and Atom Utilities (Extended Set)

For additional pure string/atom helpers (`sub_atom/5`, `atom_string/2`, `string_concat/3`) enable the extended set before starting the server:

```bash
export SWI_MCP_EXTENDED_SAFE=true
npm run server
```

Examples:

- Extract a substring:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "sub_atom('hello_world', 6, 5, 0, S)"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "S = world"

- Convert between atom and string:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "atom_string(A, \"hello\")"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "A = hello"

- Concatenate atoms (portable across SWI versions):

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "atom_concat(\"hello\", \"_world\", S)"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "S = hello_world"

### Engine Mode Equivalents

You can run these in engine mode for true backtracking control.

Example: enumerate even numbers with an engine session.

1) Start engine
```json
{
  "query": "(between(1,10,X), 0 is X mod 2)"
}
```
Use tool `query_startEngine` with the JSON above.

2) Fetch solutions iteratively with `query_next`
```json
{}
```
Each call yields a new solution until you receive "No more solutions available".

3) Close the engine session
```json
{}
```
Use tool `query_close`.

Notes:
- All examples rely on the server’s whitelist of pure predicates and kb-restricted calls.
- If you need more helpers, enable the extended set or ask to add specific pure predicates.

Commit message:

docs: overhaul README and docs, align with current API
- Rewrite README for clarity; drop exact size numbers; correct tool names/env vars; add
concise Quick Start and links
- Add docs: docs/architecture.md, docs/deployment.md, docs/logging.md; cross-link from
README
- Update README-npm.md to match current handlers; fix license to BSD-3-Clause
- Remove SWI_MCP_EXTENDED_SAFE from docs; adjust examples to note helpers available under
sandbox
- Update SECURITY.md: use npm install (not --production) and clarify SWI_MCP_PROLOG_PATH

docs/examples.md, after:

# SWI-Prolog MCP Server - Example Queries

A collection of practical examples for using the SWI-Prolog MCP Server.

## Setup

1. Build server and start inspector:
```bash
npm run build
npx @modelcontextprotocol/inspector --transport stdio node build/index.js
```

2. Browser opens automatically with the Inspector interface

## Basic Examples

### 1. Load Test File

**Tool:** `db_load`
```json
{
  "filename": "test.pl"
}
```

**Expected Response:** Confirmation that the file was loaded

### 2. List Available Predicates

**Tool:** `symbols_list`
```json
{}
```

**Expected Response:** List of all available predicates with arity (e.g. `parent/2`, `male/1`)

## Family Data Examples

### 3. Find All Parents of Mary

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "parent(X, mary)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected Response:** First parent (e.g., "X = john")

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected Response:** Next parent or "no more solutions"

**Tool:** `query_close`
```json
{}
```

### 4. Step-by-Step List Member Query

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "member(X, [apple, banana, cherry])"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = apple"

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = banana"

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = cherry"

**Tool:** `query_close`
```json
{}
```

## Advanced Examples

### 5. Add New Family Relations

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "parent(alice, bob)"
}
```

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "parent(bob, charlie)"
}
```

### 6. Query with Rules

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "grandparent(X, Z) :- parent(X, Y), parent(Y, Z)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "grandparent(alice, charlie)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Expected:** "true" (alice is grandmother of charlie)

### 7. Number Range Queries

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "between(1, 5, X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (repeat multiple times)
```json
{}
```
**Responses:** "X = 1", "X = 2", "X = 3", "X = 4", "X = 5", then "no more solutions"

### 8. Mathematical Calculations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "X is 2 + 3 * 4"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = 14"

### 9. List Operations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "append([1,2], [3,4], X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = [1,2,3,4]"

### 10. Backtracking with Multiple Solutions

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "member(X, [red, green, blue]), member(Y, [car, bike])"
}
```

This finds all combinations of colors and vehicles:

**Tool:** `query_next` (multiple times)
- "X = red, Y = car"
- "X = red, Y = bike"  
- "X = green, Y = car"
- "X = green, Y = bike"
- "X = blue, Y = car"
- "X = blue, Y = bike"

### 11. Working with Strings

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(john, pizza)"
}
```

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(mary, pasta)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "likes(Person, Food)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (repeat)
- "Person = john, Food = pizza"
- "Person = mary, Food = pasta"

### 12. Remove Facts

**Tool:** `db_retract`
```json
{
  "fact": "likes(john, pizza)"
}
```

### 13. Complex Arithmetic

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "X is sqrt(16), Y is X + 10"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "X = 4, Y = 14"

### 14. Type Checking

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "number(42)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "true"

### 15. Variable Instantiation Check

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "var(X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "true" (X is uninstantiated)

## Error Handling Examples

### 16. Invalid Syntax

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "this is not valid prolog"
}
```
**Expected:** Error message about syntax

### 17. Non-existent Predicate

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "nonexistent_predicate(X)"
}
```
**Expected:** "no_solutions" or error message

### 18. File Not Found

**Tool:** `db_load`
```json
{
  "filename": "nonexistent_file.pl"
}
```
**Expected:** Error message about file not found

## Performance Examples

### 19. Large List Operations

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "length(List, 1000), member(500, List)"
}
```

This tests performance with large data structures.

### 20. Infinite Solutions (Controlled)

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "between(1, inf, X)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next` (a few times, then close)
**Tool:** `query_close` (to prevent infinite computation)

## Integration Workflow

### 21. Complete Knowledge Base Session

1. Load data: `db_load` → `{"filename": "family.pl"}`
2. Explore structure: `symbols_list` → `{}`
3. Query base facts: `query_start` → `{"query": "parent(X, Y)"}`
4. Get solutions step by step with `query_next`
5. Add new family: `db_assert` → `{"fact": "parent(alice, bob)"}`
6. Complex query: `query_start` → `{"query": "grandparent(X, Y)"}`
7. Cleanup: `db_retract` → `{"fact": "parent(alice, bob)"}`

## Best Practices

### Query Session Management
- Always `query_close` queries when done to free resources
- Use step-by-step retrieval for potentially large result sets
- Check "more_solutions" flag to know when to stop

### Error Prevention
- Validate file paths before `db_load`
- Test simple queries before complex ones
- **Backup creation**: Use `query_start` to document facts before `db_retract`

### Performance Tips
- Close infinite or very large solution queries early
- Use specific queries instead of overly general ones
- Consider using `query_close` if you only need the first few solutions

## Debugging Workflow

1. List predicates: `symbols_list`
2. Test basic facts: `query` → simple fact checking
3. Build complexity gradually
4. Use step-by-step `next` to understand solution flow
5. Add debugging facts with `db_assert` for tracing

## Known Variations

Depending on SWI‑Prolog and environment settings, response formatting may vary slightly:

- Atoms/strings: some outputs include quotes (e.g., `S="hello_world"`) while others show atoms without quotes (`S=hello_world`).
- Lists and bindings: values may appear inside brackets depending on the term structure (e.g., `Solution: [S=world]`).
- Whitespace: spacing around `=` can vary.

Tips:
- Prefer pattern‑based matching in clients/tests (e.g., `/S\s*=\s*hello_world/`) rather than strict string equality.
- For structured parsing, use the server’s `solution([...])` format as the source of truth and then format for display.

## Safe Built-ins (Whitelist) & Examples

The server enables a safe subset of pure built-ins and list utilities in the `kb` module so you can write useful queries without side effects. Below are practical examples that work out of the box.

### Arithmetic and Filtering

Find all even numbers between 1 and 10:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "findall(X, (between(1,10,X), 0 is X mod 2), L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [2,4,6,8,10]"

### Collections with findall/3

Collect elements from a list:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "findall(X, member(X, [a,b,c]), L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [a,b,c]"

### Guarded maplist/2-3 (kb only)

Define a pure helper, then map it over a list. The server exposes `kb:maplist` which only accepts `kb:` goals to keep execution safe.

1) Define a helper in `kb`:

**Tool:** `db_assert`
```json
{
  "fact": "double(X, Y) :- Y is X * 2"
}
```

2) Map over a list:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "kb:maplist(double, [1,2,3], L)"
}
```

**Tool:** `query_next`
```json
{}
```
**Response:** "L = [2,4,6]"

### String and Atom Utilities

Pure string/atom helpers such as `sub_atom/5`, `atom_string/2`, and `string_concat/3` are available under the sandboxed safe set.

Examples:

- Extract a substring:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "sub_atom('hello_world', 6, 5, 0, S)"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "S = world"

- Convert between atom and string:

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "atom_string(A, \"hello\")"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "A = hello"

- Concatenate atoms (portable across SWI versions):

**Tool:** `query_start`
```json
{
  "query": "atom_concat(\"hello\", \"_world\", S)"
}
```
**Tool:** `query_next` → "S = hello_world"

### Engine Mode Equivalents

You can run these in engine mode for true backtracking control.

Example: enumerate even numbers with an engine session.

1) Start engine
```json
{
  "query": "(between(1,10,X), 0 is X mod 2)"
}
```
Use tool `query_startEngine` with the JSON above.

2) Fetch solutions iteratively with `query_next`
```json
{}
```
Each call yields a new solution until you receive "No more solutions available".

3) Close the engine session
```json
{}
```
Use tool `query_close`.

Notes:
- All examples rely on the server’s whitelist of pure predicates and kb-restricted calls.
- If you need additional helpers, open an issue to request specific pure predicates.
